Managing Partner: Organisational The IJ Hub NPC is a non-profit company spun off by the amaBhungane Centre for Investigative Journalism to support investigative journalism in Southern Africa. It builds editorial and organisational capacity via fellowships, workshops, coaching, networking and advice, and by raising philanthropic funding for member investigative journalism centres. Current member centres are based in Namibia, Botswana, Zambia, Malawi, eSwatini, Lesotho and South Africa. This is a position entailing great responsibility and reward. You will lead the Hub alongside a co-managing partner responsible for editorial matters. Purpose: • Provide strategic leadership to the Hub in consultation with your co-managing partner and the board • Lead and manage the Hub financially and administratively • Lead and manage the Hub’s sustainability efforts • Implement activities. Key deliverables: • Grow the Hub and its range of service offerings • Manage the Hub operationally: compliance, finances, etc • Build and manage stakeholder relationships • Fundraise for the Hub and member centres • Evaluate funding applications from member centres and disburse grants to them • Help arrange fellowships, workshops etc • Provide advisory support – compliance, financial, sustainability, etc — to member centres. The successful applicant must:­ • Demonstrate relevant non-profit and/or media sector experience in roles with similar levels of responsibility • Be able to manage a company financially and have the necessary accounting and compliance literacy • Be a self-motivator • Be a good communicator Attributes that will be a plus: • Knowledge of the political economy and media landscape of Southern Africa • Online and tech savvy The successful applicant will report to the Hub’s board, which consists of high-powered academic, media and legal personalities. Competitive remuneration is offered. The Hub is committed to transformation. Black persons and women are encouraged to apply. Please email your CV and a concise letter of motivation (one page maximum) to ijhubrecruitment@gmail.com by 30 April 2022. The CV and letter should speak to the above criteria. Only shortlisted candidates will be contacted.